The books that you need is Seymour de Rich's English bookletters, which is fairly out of date now, because it was written in 1930, but it's still the only sort of consecutive coherent one-volume account of English bookletting.
You need also to consult John Carter's taste and technique in bookletting.
Well, there are a number of books on book collection in the US of A, which you'll know about.
Again, quite a bit of acquisitions of British books, too.
Now, what we've seen, of course, in the last 30 years, since Carter's time, was a... Carter sort of saw a more or less continuous...
amalgamation of the private collector and the institutional collector.
I hope to cover both, by the way.
Well, yes, but I mean there appeared to be a convergence of paths taking place 30 years ago.
That has totally ceased now.
The institutions are
No longer serious contenders for... What do you attribute that to?
No money.
None of the institutions have got the money to keep up the market.
Both the U.S.
of A and in Britain and in Germany and France.
A much freer reign on capitalist enterprise.
Conversely, why these extraordinary crises?
Because in a free enterprise society such as has taken over in the whole of the world from a controlled economy such as operated from the end of the war until 1960 has resulted in a familiar picture of 95% of the wealth ending up in 5% of the hands.
I mean, the great landmark in collecting in our time is Mr Bond paying 54 million for Van Gogh's irises.
And he did that for a number of reasons.
First, because he was outbid on the sunflowers by the Japanese.
Secondly, because he was financed to purchase it by
the auction house.
Mr. Taubman, who owns Sotheby's, I once had the privilege of sitting next to him, and he said, he said, I'm now marketing art, he said.
I'm used to marketing root beer, and root beer is simple.
You market it, and you enlarge the market, and you just manufacture more root beer,
to in February market that you've made for it, he said.
But the trouble with art is it's different.
There's a limited supply.
You can't manufacture more art.
Does that apply to books as well, do you think?
Art is a term used to cover anything sellable by an auction house.
So Mr. Taubman, just some years ago, Mr. Taubman's theory was that
The answer to this was to persuade people to turn over their art more often.
He said, you know, at the moment, why people hold on to things for 30 years.
He said, we want to get that down to 10 years, and better still, 3 years.
I don't know what success he's had.
It looks as if he's been rather successful these days.
Well, you look at the provenances of these books.
Yeah, I mean, Mr. Abrams is selling his books at London, in London this week, most of them.
bought in the last 20 years.
The Garden Inc.
is now going to... is barely 10 years old.
I have that on my list.
They're living up to their Mr. Taubmans.
It's also rather interesting in this context that all the auction houses are now enlarging the catchment area of what's sellable so that
uh real scholarship is going for the first time into uh the discard you know any old thing at all an old table knife uh an old hat stand uh i've always felt there's a fine line between antiques and junk well yes uh and and but but it's it's not so much a fine line it's a blurred line and and
The blur is getting blurrier, in my view.
You know, it's all very interesting.
It's all historically significant.
David Redman at Sotheby's told me he believes that we are in the middle of another great golden age.
comparable, he believes, had disappeared.
To that, epitomized by Huntington and the successors to Hull, Hutt, Horton, and I said, how can you possibly say that?
I said, do we have collectors today on the scale of a Huntington who can buy libraries on block?
And he said, you just don't know who they are.
Do you agree with that?
I agree with him, yes.
Who are some of these people?
Well, I mean, there's Otto Schaeffer in Germany.
Is he accessible, do you think?
Yes, I would have thought he was.
Is he a German consulate or something like that?
Well, I mean, his name appears in countless directories.
I mean, you have about to write and ask, I would say.
There's Mr. Henri Schiller in Paris.
I always spell that.
S-S-C-H-I-L-L-E-R Schiller.
But the accent is not the last in the French manner.
There's a body called the International Association of Bibliophiles.
Headquartered where?
Well, it has no... In France is the answer, yes.
If you like, Mr. Antoine Coron, C-O-R-O-N, at the Bibliothèque Nationale in Paris is the sort of correspondent.
It would certainly be worth my while to share with these people.
Yes.
Well, I mean, most of the great private collectors are members of this body.
Including the British and Americans?
Yes.
I mean, apart from
John Paul Getty, Jr.
There are no great British collectors at the moment.
Is Getty a great collector?
Oh, very much so, yes.
On a very, very big scale.
Of books?
Of books.
Are these out in California?
No, this is John Paul Getty, Jr.
This is in England.
He and his father's trust are not on speaking terms.
I wonder if he would be
interested in discussing him?
Not at all.
You will not get to see him.
He's highly reclusive.
How about the library?
Is that accessible?
No, it's completely inaccessible.
And that's bad, isn't it?
Well, no.
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
He's building a new building.
He's building a great new library in Buckinghamshire, about 30 miles outside London.
And when
that library building and his collection is going to be fully accessible to anybody.
If that is, in a general sense, that's another one of my theses, is that if there is a thesis that I hope will run through my book, that not only has the collector acquired because he must possess wonderful things and milestones in the development of file, et cetera, but he is also
and in a bleak way, and even in a direct way, contributed to the preservation of human thought, which has actually been responsible for saving things in many instances which might otherwise disappear.
And these are instances, these are examples that I would like to remove in my book, on the small scale and on the great scale.
You brought together in a brilliant manner, I must say, Munde's book,
Phillips.
Oh, yes.
Now, Phillips was crazy, I guess, but then again, perhaps not.
Then you see that there were... Well, I mean, we're all eccentric.
We're all eccentric.
But when they find Ovid's metamorphosis buried in a heap of trash, which is to be found nowhere else, well, then this has contributed some... Well, we did.
Yes, well, we...
Well, yes.
That's an example of what I found.
The heap of trash is going in a bit, actually.
We don't, well, well, anyway.
You see my point.
Oh, yes.
I mean, and I mean, I wrote a little piece on Phillips in some magazine that some of these put out.
which I made the point that he was quite unrepentant about forcing up the price of goods against himself, saying quite firmly that nothing ensures the preservation of manuscripts so effectively as the paying of a high price for them.
So that, I mean, you can't regard that man as a madman.
He had a very clear idea of what he was doing.
I guess the fact that he was so, he was not a nice person, that is, but that's very relevant.
Yes, well, no, I don't think Huntington was a particularly nice person either.
I saw a very interesting comment about Huntington.
He owned everyone, and it was not even in the context of acquiring I thought books, is that he,
did very dubious practices, I guess, as many of the Ravavarons did.
Well, yes, I mean, though I don't think he's too mentioned in the same breath as Mr. Bohini, for example, when it comes to Shara and Crookery.
No, I mean, there's a very sort of complex further psychological issue there about the extent to which
building libraries and collecting great collections of pictures is an unconscious retribution to humanity of something that you feel you've swindled them off.
I know we have to go to the call.
By the way, do you mind if I record your statements at the call?
No, do by all means.
Do you think we'll have a chance to talk afterwards?
Or are you busy?
No, I've got a certain amount to do, and I've absolutely got to go to the art gallery.
And I've got to push off from here about half past four, I suppose.
But I mean, yes, after this do, I'm sure.
I do have some things.
Well, recite the questions now, and let me think about them.
I wanted to talk a little bit about
The Garden Collection, about Haven Home War.
Well, I know no more than I wrote in the introduction.
It was very tantalizing.
I guess you've met him ten years ago.
Yeah, I haven't seen him since.
I saw him at the sale by the way he stayed in the balcony.
I figured out who Mr. Davis was.
Have you met him before?
He's an investor, right?
I don't know.
There's no good asking me.
I've never met him.
How is it that you came to write The Press before?
Well, this is certainly not for publication.
Sotheby's ran up in a great panic and said, look, we're in the hands of the lawyers who are squabbling on behalf of their principals about what we're going to do.
and the lawyers have agreed that each of the principles is allowed to make a statement and they said look we can't send out a catalog of some of the greatest books in the world without some sort of um introduction of a kind that our customers will understand so uh could you could you do it and i said well i'm sure i could do it how long have i got and was caught and then they said well could you fax
That's wonderful.
I'm not tired of that.
I'm going to shut this off.
...about litigation, where it was put together, apparently, by one of the principles, apparently, as an investment.
I mean, there have been lots of quarrels about these first elections, some of which have certainly gone to litigation.
I mean...
I mean, litigation is all too frugal and fair.
The outcome of almost anybody's will, you know, that the people who think they have the right wares.
But the key word there is will.
Here we have two men quite alike.
Yes.
Yes, I suppose that's perfectly true.
That it's unusual for there to be litigation about the disposal of a collection during the lifetime.
Especially when they're both, preferably young men, you know.
Yeah.
That's quite curious.
Do you think it's a great collection with focus?
Well, it's a great collection.
Well, no, it's a collection of great books.
I don't think it's a great collection with focus.
And it doesn't seem to me to have anything that I'd call a focus at all, other than this rather vague concept of greatness, which obviously means something to Mr. Havener-Moore, for all I know.
Well, on Nizhinsky's diary, yes.
Yes, I mean, I mean, probably.
It's what's called high-spot collective.
locked in the Metropolitan Library.
It was a marvelous book.
I've always thought that my uncollected tapes are probably streaming all over the world now.
I think we've been very happy to welcome speaker today Nicholas Barker from the British Library and the editor of the book collection.
It's, as the topic is announced, going to be the subject of this book lecture, the editor looks back.
So that over your shoulder, don't look back somewhere you can.
So that you know who we are and where we're coming from, because we both, as we did traditionally here, introduce ourselves.
I'm John, the director of the publication of the American Aquarian Society.
I'm just joking.
Everybody may know we want to have a comment.
There's a late comment, but I'm Marcus McCarrison of the American American Society.
Daryl Heider, Common Printer.
I'm Sid Berger, curator of Printed Books.
Thank you so much.
I'm Nick Vazmanes, book editor of the Worcester Telegram and working on a book about book collecting.
And we have a author of AAS, Chris Nerva Star-Water-Lady, as you said, to do a nice book.
Joanne Chase.
Joanne Chase, head of British German.
Right.
Well, the book collector, of which I have been the editor for 24 years and two months, was founded in 1952 before book collectors as such had become an endangered species.
Book collectors would be found all over the place in those days.
They came in all sorts of shapes and sizes.
There was the Sixpenny Barrier model, whose books were not remarkable for condition, but were all of them bargains.
The My Favourite Authors, for whom the word first edition was originally invented.
The Tuppence Coloured model, which specialised in colour plate books.
And there were others who lived on local topography, private press books.
law books, travel and discovery.
There were even one or two novel creatures who were foraging in the then virgin forests of economics and science.
Most of all there was the great transatlantic collector which had been driven back into its natural native habitat or reservations by the war and was still rarely found in the eastern hemisphere but whatever shape or size they came in
Book collectors led a free, unfettered life.
A systematic study of the species, the ringing of typical specimens by librarians, the threat of extinction by predatory tax collectors, investors and inflation, all this lay in the future.
It was indeed hard to draw systematic lines between such distinctive species as librarians and collectors, or professionals and amateurs.
and they all tended to be lumped together under the generic heading of book lovers.
Bibliophiles, a word tainted by the suspicion that it ought to be pronounced with a French accent, was something you read but did not speak about.
With this in mind, you'll have some idea of the constituency to which the first book collector was addressed, uh, gosh, 37 years ago.
Its title referred to a state of mind, a kind of interest rather than a particular sort of person, something best conveyed by an apt parallel.
There was, and I hope there still is in England, a journal called The Muck Shifter and Earth Removing Chronicle.
If you think of the book collector in that light, you have some idea of what it is about.
It's not how to collect first editions, although you can learn a good deal about that in its pages.
nor how to tell a genuine article from fakes, nor how to buy cheap and sell dear, nor what it is worth.
If all that interests you, there are other and better sources of information.
The book collector will only offer occasional help.
What it does, sir, is that fraternity of book collectors that I've just described.
There's always a distinction that is apt to be made between people who just read books and book collectors who collect them.
admire their bindings or their printing or just pat anything but read them.
I'm not going to go into all that, not now anyhow, but I will say that you won't enjoy the book collection unless you're prepared to do both.
Now I'm beginning to realise I'm making it sound not only rather prim and proper but possibly even forbidding back then for a moment to the early history.
In fact,
If you'll forgive a rather Irish turn of phrase, the first number of the book collector is really not its beginning at all.
If you were to buy a series of back numbers now, like as not, you'd find before the first volume, which rather tartanly is in a smaller format than its previous successors, another little bunch of magazines, mostly no thicker than pamphlets, under the title of the Book Handbook.
If you are very lucky, you will find them already bound together.
More often than not, they remain unbound because it is all but impossible to work out the order of the pages.
Odd sections pop up in later numbers intended but not described as such as supplements to earlier numbers.
Indexes of what appear separately or attach to issues to which they do not refer.
I still get despairing or infuriated letters about it.
All this may be explained if I quote from a note on page III, which follows a blank leaf, following an index paginated 77 to 85.
I'm not sure at all to this day where PPI to II are, which runs as follows.
This volume was issued serially in nine parts.
The first number of the book handbook appeared in February 1947 when there was not enough coal or electricity to work the printing machines.
Some power was supplied by hand and some by means of a trailer pump which had been used to pump water into the fires caused by the Germans in their air raids.
The first six parts were printed on ration paper by the Broadwater Press Limited of Wellingarden City.
The other three parts
pages 129 to 176, 369 to 476, by Messrs W. S. Cowell Ltd of Ipswich.
That characteristic statement of the pagination of parts 7 to 9 tells you something about the founder, a remarkable man who seldom stayed to finish what he'd begun, called Reginald Horrocks.
But he tells you more about the conditions in which not only books, but the staples of life, I mean the other staples of life,
like food and clothes, were rationed.
A war-torn Britain of 30 years, 40 years ago now seems almost unimaginably remote.
But with all that, the contents of the book handbook are a recognisable mirror of what you find in the book collected today.
I'm not going to describe them in any detail, but it ranged from medieval manuscripts to contemporary book illustrations, from book binding to the Bayes Psalm book.
It contained a bibliography of that extraordinary 18th century novelist Robert Bage,
an exhaustive account of the 16th century French book collector Jacques-Auguste de Plou, and a series of articles by the venerable Sidney Cockrell, who had started his career as secretary to William Morris's Kelmscott Press, and ended it as director of the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge on signed manuscripts in my collection.
I particularly like a piece by Gilbert Faves, who was then the manager of Foyle's rare book department,
on a series of encounters with Bernard Shaw in the course of buying books no longer wanted when Shaw was selling his London flat.
There was inevitably a certain amount of confusion, and Fabes concluded one letter with an apologetic, I'm afraid I might be in Mr. Shaw's bad books.
He got a postcard by return.
It simply said, Mr. Shaw has no bad books.
Well, the book collector, the book handbook rather, staggered on at irregular intervals from 1947 to 1950.
But in 1951, perhaps in some financial straits, a change had faced.
This was due to the impact of the late Lord Kemsley, who was then one of England's major newspaper magnates, owner in particular of the London Sunday Times, which was the biggest and grandest of the Sundays, who had just embarked on a career, brief, as it turned out, but heady, of what I can only call bibliophilae.
This embraced the collecting of books himself, on the one hand, and the establishment of a publishing business, to which shortly afterwards a small printing shop was added, both bearing the same imprint, the Dropmore Press.
Dropmore was Lord Kemsley's splendid country house.
So, with a new enthusiasm and new funds, the book handbook entered a new existence with a new sense of order and method, and even an editorial board drawn from Lord Kemsley's associates.
It became a quarterly, and what was now called the second volume duly achieved four numbers, the first two printed by Messers Cowell and the second by the new Rockmore Press, whose imprint as publisher appeared on the whole volume.
But volume two was the last.
Horrocks was an individualist who did not have calamitised corporate life, even on this modest scale.
Irreconcilable petty conflict resulted in a decision to close down the book handbook.
This was, however, reckoning without the readers, who were determined that it should not die.
A deputation of the most prominent and determined, among them Percy Muir, John Hayward, John Carter, and Ian Fleming, persuaded Lord Kemsley to grant a reprieve.
The terms were that they should undertake the management themselves, and this change of management indicated a change of title, so in 1952 the book handbook became the book collector.
Apart from this, there was very little change.
The format was preserved, and Sir Sidney Cockrell's articles on the manuscripts in his collection continued as if nothing had happened.
At the end of the year, the page size was increased, a distinct advantage when it came to reproducing things like title pages or the bindings of larger books, which suffered by reduction.
And since then, apart from the covers, of which more later, nothing much has changed about the layout and appearance of the book collector.
But who were they, these authoritative enthusiasts who took over the book collector and gave it the character and quality that ensured its survival?
Who were Carter, Muir, Fleming and Hayward?
Well, they were, I suppose, the heroes of my youth.
And to explain that, I have to interject here a few words of pure autobiography, and I must apologise in advance for this piece of egocentricity.
I was born and brought up in Cambridge, a university town where my father was a professor.
We lived in a large house, more or less full of books, about 20,000, I think.
Some of them were new, but quite a lot of them were old.
My father, who was born in 1874, had been buying books all his life, and even the books he had bought new as a young man were now quite old.
Besides, in his young day, old books were quite cheap.
I still have his Folio Euripides, printed at Val in 1564,
and it has the price he paid marked inside it.
Eight shillings and sixpence, seven shillings cash.
Those were the days when university booksellers were happy to give unlimited credit to young academics.
And at eight and six or seven shillings, it was probably cheaper than a new Oxford text of the same author.
Cambridge had three other assets, as far as I was concerned.
A university library, from which senior members of the university were allowed to borrow books.
A university press,
world-famed for its fine printing under the watchful eye of Stanley Morrison, and David's Bookstall, the stall in the market where old Gustave David would set out the books he'd bought cheap and still priced cheap every week.
On his 70th birthday, which was in 1938, I think, his many friends in the university offered the old man the choice of an honorary degree or a celebration dinner.
Characteristically, he chose the latter.
He did himself well, cried gently at the moving speeches in his honour, but went to sleep before the time came for it to reply.
So it came about that I really can't remember a time when I was not hooked on old books.
I still have the 1651 Elsevier Catullus that I bought when I was ten from David for sixpence, a whole week's pocket money.
I still remember the excitement of reading the first English encyclopedia, Bartholomeus Anglicus De Proprietatis Rerum,
In English, I was not that precocious.
But in the 1535 edition, printed by Thomas Bartlett, the father took out of the library, believe it or not.
In 1946, I went to school in London, and I spent my first half-holiday scouring the Charing Cross Road.
A visit to Quaritch's distinguished bookshop on a subsequent holiday was less happy.
I went and waited, but no one paid much attention to me.
I wasn't, you know, very big.
So I crept upstairs to the first floor, where I knew the best books were kept, and was soon happily browsing.
Meantime, my absence had been noted, and as I had clearly not gone out through the front door, a pursuit was instituted.
It was fiery-faced Mr Newton, I don't know, some of you may remember, who ran me down and out of the shop, not I think by the ear, but I felt like it, with the word, there's nothing in there for you that's sunny.
It was the last word that rankled even more than the patent until the first.
London led to a new enthusiasm.
Much of it was still blitzed, and at the end of the school garden, between it and the Houses of Parliament, was a small printing works that had stopped an incendiary bomb.
Anything usable had been moved out, and there the remnant stood, waiting for renovation or demolition.
Its punctured roof, roughly covered with a tarpaulin that flapped in the wind,
I discovered that if you climbed up a drain pipe and riddled under the tarp...